DOC-11961 Provide comprehensive documentation for hotspots (#19282)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v25.1/understand-hotspots.md

Queues, such as logs, generally require data to be ordered by write, which necessitates indexing in a way that is likely to create a hotspot. An outbox where data is deleted as it is read has an additional problem: it tends to accumulate an ordered set of [garbage data]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/operational-faqs.md %}#why-is-my-disk-usage-not-decreasing-after-deleting-data) behind the live data. Since the system cannot determine whether any live rows exist within the garbage data, what appears to be a small table scan to the user can actually result in an unexpectedly intensive scan on the garbage data.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-5.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Outbox hotspot example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

To mitigate this issue, it is advisable to use [Change Data Capture (CDC)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cdc-queries.md %}) to ensure subscription to updates instead of using Outbox tables. If using CDC is not possible, sharding the index that the outbox uses for ordering can reduce the likelihood of a hotspot within the cluster.

### Row Hotspot

**Synonyms:** hot key, hot row, point hotspot

> A _row hotspot_ is a hotspot where an individual point in the keyspace becomes throughput limiting, often due to high activity on a single row. The word "point" illustrates the fact that the location that is hot is indivisible, and therefore cannot be [split]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/load-based-splitting.md %}). A classic example is a social media application with a high volume of activity on certain users.

Reviewer: Since there isn't reference to point hotspots before this point, might be worth scrapping the reference:

`Since rows are inherently indivisible, a hotspot on a row cannot be split...`

Without changing the default behavior of the system, the load will not be distributed because it needs to be served by a single range. This behavior is not just temporary; certain users, such as celebrities and influencers, may consistently experience a high volume of activity compared to the average user. This can result in a system with multiple hotspots, each of which can potentially overload the system at any moment.

The following image visualizes a keyspace with multiple hot rows. In a large enough cluster, each of these rows can burden the range they live in, leading to multiple burdened nodes.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-7.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Multiple row hotspots example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

### Hot Sequence

_Hot sequences_ and _hot indexes_ are distinct concepts, though they may appear similar at a glance, since a hot index often involves a sequence. However, they have different bottlenecks.

For example, consider the following schema:

~~~ sql
CREATE TABLE products (
   id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY USING HASH
);

> ~~~

Author: @angles-n-daemons , would an example using a `SEQUENCE` rather than `SERIAL` be clearer? Something like:

~~~ sql
CREATE TABLE products (
    id INT PRIMARY KEY USING HASH,
    name STRING
);
CREATE SEQUENCE products_id_seq;
--Insert 2 million rows
INSERT INTO products (id, name) SELECT nextval('products_id_seq'), (1000000000000000 + generate_series(1,2000000))::STRING;
~~~

Reviewer: It would, actually this is a good note. It turns out that `SERIAL` doesn't use sequences in CRDB as it does in postgres. Can you make this change?

Author: replaced `SERIAL` example with `SEQUENCE` example.

  CASE WHEN province <> 'alabama' THEN 'us-east-1'
  CASE WHEN province <> 'alaska' THEN 'us-west-2'
  ...
  END
) STORED;
~~~

In the `ALTER` statement, the first condition `province <> 'alabama'` checks whether the province is not `alabama`. It matches every single row in the table that is not `alabama`, and will ironically place them in the `us-east-1` region.

By doing this, you have limited the traffic from the highest throughput table to a single region, five nodes or 10% of the nodes in your cluster.

The following image visualizes the regional breakout of data in the `orders` table. Because of the domiciling policy, reads and writes to the `orders` table will be focused on the `us-east-1` nodes.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-10.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Locality hotspot example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

### Temporal Hotspot

**Synonyms:** time-based hotspot

_Temporal hotspots_ refer to increased database usage during particular windows of time. These take a variety of shapes, from event and holiday usage (such as Black Friday or the Superbowl), to synchronized job runs.

> ### Load Balancing Hotspot

Reviewer 2: Can we call out the scenario where there could be a load balancer hot spot? One node receiving more connections than others. Connections should be distributed equally across all the nodes in the cluster.

Load balancer configuration issue and should be revisited

Author: updated

---
title: Understand Hotspots
summary: Learn about the terminology and patterns of hotspots in CockroachDB
toc: true
---

> Hotspots in distributed SQL are a common topic. The term _hotspot_ is useful to describe bottlenecks in scaling a database cluster within workloads. This page defines terms and patterns to improve understanding for troubleshooting hotspots.

Author: Good catch! I was meaning to correct that and forgot. Updated.

### Hot Node

**Synonyms:** Node Hotspot

A _hot node_ is the most common way to identify a hotspot, as distributed SQL systems often provide resource utilization by node by default.

Identifying a hot node, or a node hotspot, is often part of troubleshooting hotspots in distributed databases. While this may not be the first place you notice issues, it is often the first place you can confidently identify a hotspot. Multiple nodes may become hot, but they will be clearly identifiable as their utilization metrics will be outliers compared to the rest of the cluster.

All hotspot types described in this page will create hot nodes, as long as the cluster is not already operating at maximum capacity.

> The following image is a graph of [CPU Percent]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-hardware-dashboard.md %}#cpu-percent) utilization by node. Most of the nodes hover around 25%, while one hot node is around 95%. The fact that the hot node changes indicates that the hotspot is moving as the [ranges]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#range) containing writes fill up and split.

Author: added links to subsequent sections.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-1.png' | relative_url }}" alt="graph of CPU Percent utilization by node showing hot nodes" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

### Hot Range

**Synonyms:** Range Hotspot

A _hot range_ is one level down from the node hotspot. [Ranges]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#range) are the smallest unit of data distribution, making them critical in troubleshooting hotspots.

If a node is hot, it is often due to a single hot range. The system may split the hot range to redistribute the load or the range may stay hot until it fills up and splits. In the second case, the split is likely the continuation of the hotspot (as shown in the previous image). If the system is unable to identify a good splitting point for a hot range, the hot range becomes a bottleneck.

> Understanding which range is hot and having knowledge of the [keyspace]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#range) allows you to better approximate the nature of the hotspot compared to relying solely on node-level statistics.

Author: On the [DB Console Hot Ranges page](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v25.1/ui-hot-ranges-page) , it says:
> The Hot Ranges page of the DB Console provides details about ranges receiving a high number of reads or writes. These are known as hot ranges.

A cluster will always have ranges that have a relatively higher number of reads or writes. There are always ranges displayed on the DB Console Hot Ranges page.

 I will add that "Hot ranges are an issue when they cause a hot node."

It is especially useful when correlating pressure with activity, for example, the read pressure on Node 1 is coming from the key `/User/10`. Pressure is a useful term to describe resource limits, because it captures the ideas of [contention]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/performance-best-practices-overview.md %}#transaction-contention), utilization, and throughput - all of which can be the source of a hotspot - under a single definition.

### Index Tail

**Synonyms:** Index Maximum Present Key

An _index tail_ is the largest existing key of an index, lexigraphically. Note that this is different from the index (such as `/Table/1/1`) or index spans (such as `[/Table/1/1, /Table/1/2)`), since these are not valid row keys. An index tail instead refers to the last real key which appears in the index. For example, the head and tail of the index `/Table/1/1` are: `[/Table/1/1/aardvark, /Table/1/1/zultan]` 

## Patterns

This section goes into detail about workload patterns which result in hotspots.

### Index Hotspot

**Synonyms**: hot index, golden keyspace hotspot, monotonically increasing index, a running tail, a moving tail

> An _index hotspot_ is a hotspot on an [index]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/indexes.md %}) where the key for writes is continually increasing. This is common with indexing by an increasing column (for example, with data type of [`SERIAL`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/serial.md %}), [`TIMESTAMP`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/timestamp.md %}), or [`AUTO_INCREMENT`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/serial.md %}#auto-incrementing-is-not-always-sequential)). Index hotspots limit horizontal scaling as the index acts as a bottleneck.

Author: updated

If inserting in sequential order is important, the index itself can be [hash-sharded]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/hash-sharded-indexes.md %}), which means that it is still stored in order, albeit in some number of shards. Consider a `users` table, with a primary key `id INT`, which is hash-sharded with 4 shards, and a hashing function of modulo 4. The following image illustrates this example:

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-4.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Hash-sharded index example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

Now the writes are distributed into the tails of the shards, rather than the tail of the whole index. This benefits write performance but makes reads more challenging. If you need to read a subset of the data, you will have to scan each shard of the index.

#### Paradoxical Performance Implications

> A note on the index hotspot is that they paradoxically increase the efficiency of CockroachDB from the standpoint of the number of CPU cycles per write. This is primarily due to [write compactions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#compaction). As index hotspots continually move in a single direction, the [SST (Sorted String Table)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#log-structured-merge-trees) files generated by them have little overlap. Consequently, this results in minimal write throughput compared to a properly distributed workload.

Author: @angles-n-daemons, Would you be able to answer @kevin-v-ngo questions above?

> A note on the index hotspot is that they paradoxically increase the efficiency of CockroachDB from the standpoint of the number of CPU cycles per write. This is primarily due to [write compactions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#compaction). As index hotspots continually move in a single direction, the [SST (Sorted String Table)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#log-structured-merge-trees) files generated by them have little overlap. Consequently, this results in minimal write throughput compared to a properly distributed workload.

Reviewer: I think they should just know, that the performance benefits have a cliff. They may choose to use hotspot behavior because of the performance enhancements, and it should be known its a short-sighted choice.

  CASE WHEN province <> 'alabama' THEN 'us-east-1'
  CASE WHEN province <> 'alaska' THEN 'us-west-2'
  ...
  END
) STORED;
~~~

In the `ALTER` statement, the first condition `province <> 'alabama'` checks whether the province is not `alabama`. It matches every single row in the table that is not `alabama`, and will ironically place them in the `us-east-1` region.

By doing this, you have limited the traffic from the highest throughput table to a single region, five nodes or 10% of the nodes in your cluster.

The following image visualizes the regional breakout of data in the `orders` table. Because of the domiciling policy, reads and writes to the `orders` table will be focused on the `us-east-1` nodes.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-10.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Locality hotspot example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

### Temporal Hotspot

**Synonyms:** time-based hotspot

_Temporal hotspots_ refer to increased database usage during particular windows of time. These take a variety of shapes, from event and holiday usage (such as Black Friday or the Superbowl), to synchronized job runs.

> ### Internal Hotspot

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we should call this out since it's uncommon - what the guidance to troubleshoot this scenario?

Author: Removed section:

```
### Internal Hotspot

**Synonyms:** hot job, task hotspot

An _internal hotspot_ refers to a type of hotspot that arises from the internal operations of CockroachDB. These hotspots are significant because, although they may be caused by operator error, they often appear in ranges within the keyspace that operators are not familiar with. Examples of internal hotspots include activities such as metrics writing/scraping and jobs such as SQL statistics generation. These internal operations can create bottlenecks and performance issues within the cluster.
```

**Synonyms:** hot job, task hotspot

An _internal hotspot_ refers to a type of hotspot that arises from the internal operations of CockroachDB. These hotspots are significant because, although they may be caused by operator error, they often appear in ranges within the keyspace that operators are not familiar with. Examples of internal hotspots include activities such as metrics writing/scraping and jobs such as SQL statistics generation. These internal operations can create bottlenecks and performance issues within the database cluster.

### Load Balancing Hotspot

> A _load balancing hotspot_ is a hotspot caused by a load balancer misconfiguration. Although this issue is often considered an afterthought due to its low internal tracking value, it is important to note that all possible consumer groups can create uneven load on the cluster. For example, a [changefeed]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) subscription can create hotspots if a single node is responsible for exporting all row updates within the cluster.

Reviewer 2: What low internal tracking value?

Author: @angles-n-daemons, what did you mean by the clause below?

> Although this issue is often considered an afterthought due to its low internal tracking value

Reviewer: I'm not necessarily sure - I would say it's considered an afterthought because key related hotspots are generally more common.

Author: updated

---

> title: Understand Hotspots

Author: created follow-up issue: [DOC-12391](https://cockroachlabs.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-12391) Add link to hotspots doc from other related pages

### Hot Node

**Synonyms:** Node Hotspot

A _hot node_ is the most common way to identify a hotspot, as distributed SQL systems often provide resource utilization by node by default.

Identifying a hot node, or a node hotspot, is often part of troubleshooting hotspots in distributed databases. While this may not be the first place you notice issues, it is often the first place you can confidently identify a hotspot. Multiple nodes may become hot, but they will be clearly identifiable as their utilization metrics will be outliers compared to the rest of the cluster.

> All hotspot types described in this page will create hot nodes, as long as the cluster is not already operating at maximum capacity.

Author: updated

> The following image is a graph of [CPU Percent]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-hardware-dashboard.md %}#cpu-percent) utilization by node. Most of the nodes hover around 25%, while one hot node is around 95%. The fact that the hot node changes indicates that the hotspot is moving as the [ranges]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#range) containing writes fill up and split (for further explanation, see subsequent sections on [hot range](#hot-range) and [moving_hotspot](#moving-hotspot)).

Author: updated in previous commit

> The following image is a graph of [CPU Percent]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-hardware-dashboard.md %}#cpu-percent) utilization by node. Most of the nodes hover around 25%, while one hot node is around 95%. The fact that the hot node changes indicates that the hotspot is moving as the [ranges]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#range) containing writes fill up and split (for further explanation, see subsequent sections on [hot range](#hot-range) and [moving_hotspot](#moving-hotspot)).

Author: updated

Moving hotspots are challenging because [load-based splitting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/load-based-splitting.md %}) will not effectively partition the data to resolve them.

### Static Hotspot

A _static hotspot_ remains fixed in the keyspace, though it may move from node to node. The underlying subject of the hotspot, whether a [span]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-ranges.md %}#span-statistics) or a key, remains the same.

### Read Hotspot

**Synonyms:** Hot by Read

A _read hotspot_ is a hotspot caused by read throughput, either from a few queries reading a lot of data or many queries reading a little data. Read hotspots can result from many queries requesting the same information or accessing adjacent data.

While hotspots are often either hot by read or hot by write, they are seldom hot because of both.

### Write Hotspot

**Synonyms:** Hot by Write

A _write hotspot_ is a hotspot caused by write throughput. Write hotspots increase the likelihood of [contention]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/performance-best-practices-overview.md %}#transaction-contention) within the hot node or range, therefore leading to potential performance issues.

> Write hotspots also have the unique effect of affecting more than a single node. Since [consensus]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#consensus) and [replication]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#replication) must take place, write hotspots often affect three nodes (the default [replication factor]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %})) rather than just one node.

Author: updated

### Read/Write Pressure

_Pressure_ describes how close resources are to their limits and can be thought of as the force exerted on the actual resources in the system. Pressure can be directed towards disk I/O, CPU, memory, and even non-hardware resources like [locks]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/transaction-layer.md %}#reading).

> It is especially useful when correlating pressure with activity, for example, the read pressure on Node 1 is coming from the key `/User/10`. Pressure is a useful term to describe resource limits, because it captures the ideas of [contention]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/performance-best-practices-overview.md %}#transaction-contention), utilization, and throughput - all of which can be the source of a hotspot - under a single definition.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is especially useful when correlating pressure with activity, for example, the read pressure on Node 1 is coming from the key `/User/10`. Pressure is a useful term to describe resource limits, because it includes [contention]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/performance-best-practices-overview.md %}#transaction-contention), utilization, and throughput—all of which can be the source of a hotspot.
```

### Index Tail

**Synonyms:** Index Maximum Present Key

> An _index tail_ is the largest existing key of an index, lexigraphically. Note that this is different from the index (such as `/Table/1/1`) or index spans (such as `[/Table/1/1, /Table/1/2)`), since these are not valid row keys. An index tail instead refers to the last real key which appears in the index. For example, the head and tail of the index `/Table/1/1` are: `[/Table/1/1/aardvark, /Table/1/1/zultan]` 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An _index tail_ is the largest existing key of an index, lexigraphically. Note that this is different from the index (such as `/Table/1/1`) or index spans (such as `[/Table/1/1, /Table/1/2)`), because these are not valid row keys. An index tail instead refers to the last real key that appears in the index. For example, the head and tail of the index `/Table/1/1` are: `[/Table/1/1/aardvark, /Table/1/1/zultan]` 
```

## Patterns

> This section goes into detail about workload patterns which result in hotspots.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section goes into detail about workload patterns that can result in hotspots.
```
Will they definitely result in hotspots?

### Index Hotspot

**Synonyms**: hot index, golden keyspace hotspot, monotonically increasing index, a running tail, a moving tail

> An _index hotspot_ is a hotspot on an [index]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/indexes.md %}) where the key for writes is continually increasing. This is common with indexing by an increasing column. For example, the column may be of data type [`SERIAL`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/serial.md %}), [`TIMESTAMP`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/timestamp.md %}), or [`AUTO_INCREMENT`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/serial.md %}#auto-incrementing-is-not-always-sequential)). However, an index hotspot is not always determined by the data type. If sequential data generated by the application is inserted into an index, a hotspot may occur. Index hotspots limit horizontal scaling as the index acts as a bottleneck.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An _index hotspot_ is a hotspot on an [index]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/indexes.md %}) where the key for writes is continually increasing. This is common with indexing by an increasing column. For example, the column may be of data type [`SERIAL`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/serial.md %}), [`TIMESTAMP`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/timestamp.md %}), or [`AUTO_INCREMENT`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/serial.md %}#auto-incrementing-is-not-always-sequential). However, an index hotspot is not always determined by the data type. If sequential data generated by the application is inserted into an index, a hotspot may occur. Index hotspots limit horizontal scaling as the index acts as a bottleneck.
```

> Consider a table `users` which contains a [primary key]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/primary-key.md %}) `user_id` that is an incrementing integer value. Each new key will be the current maximum key + 1. In this way, all writes appear at the index tail. The following image visualizes writes to the `users` table using an incrementing `INT` primary key. Note how all writes are focused at the tail of the index, represented by the red section in Range 4.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider a table `users` that contains a [primary key]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/primary-key.md %}) `user_id`, which is an incrementing integer value. Each new key will be the current maximum key + 1. In this way, all writes appear at the index tail. The following image visualizes writes to the `users` table using an incrementing `INT` primary key. Note how all writes are focused at the tail of the index, represented by the red section in Range 4.
```

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-3.png' | relative_url }}" alt="incrementing INT primary key" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

> If you are able to control for the performance degradation that occurs in Range 4 in this case, you do not change the fact that the system is now limited by how many writes a single range can execute. This then, in theory, limits CockroachDB to the performance of a single node, which is, by nature, antithetical to the goals of a distributed database.

Reviewer 3: I found the first sentence a little hard to parse, does it mean "even you do x, you won't be able to do y"?
```suggestion
Even if you are able to control for the performance degradation that occurs in Range 4, it isn't possible to change that the system is now limited by how many writes a single range can execute. As a result, CockroachDB could be limited to the performance of a single node.
```

I think the final sentence here could be more direct. I gave a suggestion a shot, but I'm not sure if the meaning is right here.

Index hotspots themselves are [hot by write](#write-hotspot), [moving hotspots](#moving-hotspot) which will continue to bounce around from range to range as the data grows.

> In the ideal operation of a distributed SQL database, inserts into an index should be distributed evenly in the index's span to avoid this type of hotspot. Each range responsible for storing keys receives an even share of the workload. If the ranges containing the data become hot in this mode, scaling the cluster is as easy as adding machines horizontally.

Reviewer 3: What do you think about reworking the "scaling the cluster is as easy as adding machine horizontally."? I'm not sure that that is super easy, perhaps you could mention horizontal scaling and link to a reference?

Consider a table `users` which contains a primary keys `user_uuid` of type [`UUID`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/uuid.md %}). Because `UUID`s are pseudo-random, new rows are inserted into the keyspace at random locations. The following image visualizes writes to the `users` table using a `UUID` primary key. Red lines indicate an insert into the keyspace. Note how the red lines are distributed evenly.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-2.png' | relative_url }}" alt="UUID primary key" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

> Inserts are not the only way that index hotspots can occur. Consider the same table `users` which now has a [secondary index]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/schema-design-indexes.md %}) on a `TIMESTAMP` column:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inserts are not the only way that index hotspots can occur. Consider the same table `users` that now has a [secondary index]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/schema-design-indexes.md %}) on a `TIMESTAMP` column:
```

~~~ sql
# ddl
CREATE TABLE profiles(
   user_uuid UUID PRIMARY KEY,
   last_seen_at TIMESTAMP,
   INDEX index_last_seen_at (last_seen_at)
);

# dml
INSERT INTO profiles (user_uuid, last_seen_at) VALUES ('d9efa555-e8fd-4793-9239-f484454980cc', CURRENT_TIMESTAMP()), ('e3fabd81-2e08-4f25-99fd-8cd7e2928bd1', CURRENT_TIMESTAMP());
UPDATE profiles SET last_seen_at = CURRENT_TIMESTAMP() WHERE user_uuid='d9efa555-e8fd-4793-9239-f484454980cc';
~~~

> Because [`CURRENT_TIMESTAMP()`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/functions-and-operators.md %}#date-and-time-functions) is a steadily increasing value, this [`UPDATE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/update.md %}) will similarly burden the range at the tail of the index. While hotspots on an index tail tend to be the most common, bottlenecks on the head are not unheard of. For example, indexing on `DESC` with the same insertion strategy will cause a hotspot.

Reviewer 3: Could you rephrase "are not unheard of."? It could be a bit casual and also hard to localize. Maybe "are also possible."?

> In this page, the phrase _index hotspot_ will be reserved for a hot by write hotspot on an index, even though indexes can become hot due to read. This is because a hot by write index hotspot is the most common hotspot pattern that occurs now and in the future as workloads continue to be migrated from legacy single-node installations. Hot by read index hotspots are defined later on this page as [_lookback hotspots_](#lookback-hotspots).

Author: updated

If inserting in sequential order is important, the index itself can be [hash-sharded]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/hash-sharded-indexes.md %}), which means that it is still stored in order, albeit in some number of shards. Consider a `users` table, with a primary key `id INT`, which is hash-sharded with 4 shards, and a hashing function of modulo 4. The following image illustrates this example:

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-4.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Hash-sharded index example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

Now the writes are distributed into the tails of the shards, rather than the tail of the whole index. This benefits write performance but makes reads more challenging. If you need to read a subset of the data, you will have to scan each shard of the index.

#### Paradoxical Performance Implications

> A note on the index hotspot is that they paradoxically increase the efficiency of CockroachDB from the standpoint of the number of CPU cycles per write. This is primarily due to [write compactions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#compaction). As index hotspots continually move in a single direction, the [SST (sorted string table)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#log-structured-merge-trees) files generated by them have little overlap. Consequently, this results in minimal write throughput compared to a properly distributed workload. However, this performance boost has a limit, and relying on hotspot behavior for this advantage would be short-sighted due to the other problems hotspots can cause.

Reviewer 3: What do you think about a note for this?

Author: updated

#### Lookback Hotspots

**Synonyms:** index scan hotspot, moving read hotspot

A _lookback hotspot_ is a type of index hotspot in which a moving subset of an index is being read in a way that burdens the cluster.

For example, consider querying a `posts` table for the most recently created post: 

~~~ sql
CREATE TABLE posts(
   id UUID,
   created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
   INDEX (created_at) USING HASH
);

SELECT MAX(created_at) FROM posts GROUP BY created_at ORDER BY created_at LIMIT 1;
~~~

What makes lookback hotspots unique is that the cluster is not hot by write, but hot by read. Separately lookback hotspots also tend not to specify a key, which would evade systems using key requests to identify hotspots.

> #### Queuing Hotspot

Reviewer 4: oh nice, this is the queue-like workload section

suggest linking the `gc.ttlseconds` docs I mentioned earlier to this section

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-5.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Outbox hotspot example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

To mitigate this issue, it is advisable to use [Change Data Capture (CDC)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cdc-queries.md %}) to ensure subscription to updates instead of using Outbox tables. If using CDC is not possible, sharding the index that the outbox uses for ordering can reduce the likelihood of a hotspot within the cluster.

### Row Hotspot

**Synonyms:** hot key, hot row, point hotspot

A _row hotspot_ is a hotspot where an individual point in the keyspace becomes throughput limiting, often due to high activity on a single row. Since rows are inherently indivisible, a hotspot on a row cannot be [split]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/load-based-splitting.md %}). A classic example is a social media application with a high volume of activity on certain users.

> Consider a social media application which initially consists of two tables, `users` and `follows`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider a social media application that initially consists of two tables, `users` and `follows`:
```

Author: updated

~~~ sql
CREATE TABLE users(
   id UUID,
   username VARCHAR,
   follower_count INT
);

CREATE TABLE follows(
   follower UUID REFERENCES users(id),
   followee UUID REFERENCES users(id)
);
~~~

To avoid having to partially scan the `follows` table each time you want to know the count of `followers` for a given `user`, you can issue an `UPDATE` to the `users` table to increment the `follower_count`. This way, every time a new follower is added, the `follower_count` in the `users` table is updated directly, making it easier and faster to retrieve the `follower_count` without scanning the entire `follows` table:

~~~ sql
# user 1 follows user 2
INSERT INTO follows(follower, followee) VALUES (1, 2);

# increment follower_count
UPDATE User SET follower_count = follower_count+1 WHERE id=2;
~~~

> This simple design works well until it encounters an unexpected surge in activity. For example, consider user 471, who suddenly goes viral and gains millions of followers within an hour. This sudden increase in followers causes a significant amount of write traffic to the range responsible for this user, which the system may not be able to handle efficiently. The following image visualizes a hot row in the keyspace. Note how writes are focused on a single point, which cannot be split.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This simple design works well until it encounters an unexpected surge in activity. For example, consider user 471, who suddenly gains millions of followers within an hour. This sudden increase in followers causes a significant amount of write traffic to the range responsible for this user, which the system may not be able to handle efficiently. The following image visualizes a hot row in the keyspace. Note how writes are focused on a single point, which cannot be split.
```

Author: updated

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-6.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Single row hotspot example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

> Without changing the default behavior of the system, the load will not be distributed because it needs to be served by a single range. This behavior is not just temporary; certain users, such as celebrities and influencers, may consistently experience a high volume of activity compared to the average user. This can result in a system with multiple hotspots, each of which can potentially overload the system at any moment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Without changing the default behavior of the system, the load will not be distributed because it needs to be served by a single range. This behavior is not just temporary; certain users may consistently experience a high volume of activity compared to the average user. This can result in a system with multiple hotspots, each of which can potentially overload the system at any moment.
```

I'm not sure that defining the users is necessary.

Author: updated

--Insert 2 million rows
INSERT INTO products (id, name) SELECT nextval('products_id_sequence'), (1000000000000000 + generate_series(1,2000000))::STRING;
~~~

Because the primary key index is [hash-sharded]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/hash-sharded-indexes.md %}), rows are inserted into this table without being funneled to a single range avoiding an index hotspot. However, there is a bottleneck in how sequence values are generated. To ensure certain guarantees around sequences, they are stored in the keyspace as a single row. This makes them subject to the limitations of hot keys by write access.

The following image visualizes writes in the `products` keyspace using hash-sharded rows. With five shards, the writes are better distributed into the keyspace, but the `id` sequence row becomes the limiting factor.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-8.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Multiple row hotspots example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

Because sequences avoid user expressions, optimizations can be made to improve their performance, but unfortunately the write volume on the sequence is still that of the sum total of all its accesses.

> [Sequence caching]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-sequence.md %}#cache-sequence-values-in-memory), which allows clients to cache sequence values as to reduce the burden on the target range, serves as a good mitigation for hot sequences. Alternatively, the `unique_rowid()` function generates sequential values which have strong guarantees against collision, with the drawback that its values are not a series.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Sequence caching]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-sequence.md %}#cache-sequence-values-in-memory), which allows clients to cache sequence values to reduce the burden on the target range, serves as a good mitigation for hot sequences. Alternatively, the `unique_rowid()` function generates sequential values which have strong guarantees against collision, with the drawback that its values are not a series.
```

Author: updated

### Table Hotspot

**Synonyms:** hot table

> _Hot tables_ are another variant of hot keys. Instead of a few select keys being burdened, the majority of the table is burdened by read (and at times write) access. This generally occurs on small reference tables that are used in queries with a join clause. This can lead to uneven key access.

Reviewer 4: suggest 'join clause' be a link to our docs on joins

Consider the following example that joins a small reference table `countries` into a larger distributed table `posts`.

~~~ sql
-- ddl
CREATE TABLE countries(
id UUID PRIMARY KEY,
code VARCHAR
);

CREATE TABLE posts(
id UUID,
country_id UUID REFERENCES countries(id)
);

-- dml
SELECT * FROM posts p JOIN countries c ON p.country_id=c.id;
~~~

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-9.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Table hotspot example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

> Reads in the `posts` table may be evenly distributed, but joining the `countries` table becomes a bottleneck, since it exists in so few ranges. Splitting the `countries` table ranges can relieve pressure, but only to a theoretical limit as the indivisible points, the rows themselves, experience high throughput. [Global tables]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/global-tables.md %}) and [follower reads]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/follower-reads.md %}) can help scaling in this case, especially when write throughput is low.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Reads in the `posts` table may be evenly distributed, but joining the `countries` table becomes a bottleneck, since it exists in so few ranges. Splitting the `countries` table ranges can relieve pressure, but only to a limit as the indivisible rows experience high throughput. [Global tables]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/global-tables.md %}) and [follower reads]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/follower-reads.md %}) can help scaling in this case, especially when write throughput is low.
```

Author: updated

### Locality Hotspot

**Synonyms:** region hotspot, domicile hotspot

A _locality hotspot_ is a hotspot where a workload is bottlenecked due to [locality constraints]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/table-localities.md %}). For example, consider a cluster distributed among 10 regions (e.g., `us-east-1`, `us-west-1`, `ap-east-1`, `eu-west-1`, etc.) with 5 nodes per region. Assume this 50 node cluster is for an existing application and you wish to domicile the data on the highest throughput table, `orders`, by the region most relevant to where an order is placed.

~~~ sql
ALTER TABLE orders ADD COLUMN region crdb_internal_region AS (
  CASE WHEN province <> 'alabama' THEN 'us-east-1'
  CASE WHEN province <> 'alaska' THEN 'us-west-2'
  ...
  END
) STORED;
~~~

> In the `ALTER` statement, the first condition `province <> 'alabama'` checks whether the province is not `alabama`. It matches every single row in the table that is not `alabama`, and will ironically place them in the `us-east-1` region.

Reviewer 3: My sense is that the "ironically" may be lost on some users?

Author: removed

By doing this, you have limited the traffic from the highest throughput table to a single region, five nodes or 10% of the nodes in your cluster.

The following image visualizes the regional breakout of data in the `orders` table. Because of the domiciling policy, reads and writes to the `orders` table will be focused on the `us-east-1` nodes.

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-10.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Locality hotspot example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

### Temporal Hotspot

**Synonyms:** time-based hotspot

> _Temporal hotspots_ refer to increased database usage during particular windows of time. These take a variety of shapes, from event and holiday usage (such as Black Friday or the Superbowl), to synchronized job runs.

Reviewer 3: I was a bit split on the mentions of "Black Friday and the Superbowl". I think it's good to provide practical examples that users can understand, but my one worry was that they're both US-centric and I wonder whether they're timeless? Do you think just "from event and holiday usage" is enough without the parenthesis?

Author: removed

## Terminology

### Hotspot

The word _hotspot_ describes various skewed data access patterns in a [cluster]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#cluster), often manifesting as higher [CPU]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/common-issues-to-monitor.md %}#cpu) utilization on one or more [nodes]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#node). Hotspots can also result from [disk I/O]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/common-issues-to-monitor.md %}#storage-and-disk-i-o), [memory]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/common-issues-to-monitor.md %}#memory) usage, or other finite resources in the cluster. Hotspots are performance issues that cannot be solved by [scaling the cluster size]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/frequently-asked-questions.md %}#how-does-cockroachdb-scale), because they are typically limited to a fixed-size subset of the cluster’s resources.

### Hot node

**Synonyms:** node hotspot

A _hot node_ is the most common indicator of a hotspot, as the [DB Console Metrics page]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overview.md %}#metrics) shows resource utilization per node by default.

> 

Author: good catch! In my testing, the Docs Reviewer GPT recommended this as well.

> 

Author: updated

> 

Reviewer 3: Good to know I can catch what old Docs Reviewer catches 😄

Write hotspots are unlike the other hotspots described on this page because they affect more than a single node. Since [consensus]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#consensus) and [replication]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#replication) must take place, write hotspots often affect multiple nodes based on the [replication factor]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#num_replicas).

### Read/write pressure

_Pressure_ describes how close system resources, such as disk I/O, CPU, memory, and even non-hardware resources like [locks]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/transaction-layer.md %}#reading), are to their limits.

It is especially useful when correlating pressure with activity, for example, the read pressure on Node 1 is coming from the key `/User/10`. Pressure effectively describes resource limits, encompassing [contention]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/performance-best-practices-overview.md %}#transaction-contention), utilization, and throughput — all potential sources hotspots.

### Index tail

**Synonyms:** index maximum present key

> An _index tail_ is the largest existing key of an index, lexigraphically. Note that this is different from the index (such as `/Table/1/1`) or index spans (such as `[/Table/1/1, /Table/1/2)`), because these are not valid row keys. An index tail instead refers to the last real key that appears in the index. For example, the head and tail of the index `/Table/1/1` are: `[/Table/1/1/aardvark, /Table/1/1/zultan]` 

Author: updated

The resolution of the index hotspot often depends on your requirements for the data. If the sequential nature of the index serves no purpose, it is recommended to change the writes into the index to be randomly distributed. Ideally, primary keys in this instance would be set to `UUID`s, if your tolerance for swapover or even downtime allows it.

If inserting in sequential order is important, the index itself can be [hash-sharded]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/hash-sharded-indexes.md %}), which means that it is still stored in order, albeit in some number of shards. Consider a `users` table, with a primary key `id INT`, which is hash-sharded with 4 shards, and a hashing function of modulo 4. The following image illustrates this example:

<img src="{{ 'images/v25.1/hotspots-figure-4.png' | relative_url }}" alt="Hash-sharded index example" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

Now the writes are distributed into the tails of the shards, rather than the tail of the whole index. This benefits write performance but makes reads more challenging. If you need to read a subset of the data, you will have to scan each shard of the index.

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}

> Paradoxical performance implications

Author: updated

> Index hotspots paradoxically increase the efficiency of CockroachDB from the standpoint of the number of CPU cycles per write. This is primarily due to [write compactions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#compaction). As index hotspots continually move in a single direction, the [SST (sorted string table)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#log-structured-merge-trees) files generated by them have little overlap. Consequently, this results in minimal write throughput compared to a properly distributed workload. However, this performance boost has a limit, and relying on hotspot behavior for this advantage would be short-sighted due to the other problems hotspots can cause.

Author: updated
